+++
title = "2023 retrospective: form vs content"
date = "2024-01-02"
author = "Iraj"
description = ""
useRelativeCover = true
katex = true
draft = true
+++

As the year 2023 comes to a close, it is imperative that I reflect on something. Much has happened in the past 365 days and I definitely cannot find a single overarching theme that captures everything I experienced in that time, so instead I will focus on one question which has begun to burrow into my mind. I spent a lot of time this past year, and the few years before, consuming and reflecting on different pieces of literature. Last month for example I finished reading (after about a year of off and on attempts) Ulysses, the (in)famous novel by James Joyce. While doing this I spent some time reading secondary literature on this and other books that I have read recently. I generally believe that all kinds of knowledge are somewhat connected to one another, and so as I delved deeper into works of literature I kept asking myself if the achievements contained in these works is maybe relavant to my own endeavor, which is the pursuit of science.

---

Whether scientists like it or not, a major component of their work is writing. We write proposals for grants, we write conference abstracts and presentations, and most importantly we write papers. The latter are the primary record of our work and (in most disciplines) are the output according to which we are evaluated, be it as job applicants, as recipients for prizes, or simply as potential collaborators. These papers being repositories of the measurements and analyses we have performed, their *content* is primarily what is evaluated (although in some cases it seems like their *number* is more important, as well as which venues they are published in). And this is without a doubt the most important component of a science paper. A major discovery and the data backing it up are a critical piece of work to record, and conversely if a paper does not contain significant measurements, analyses, or insights (as with a perspective or review paper) then its value is minimal. This is uncontroversial among scientists. 

In my recent reading efforts (in 2023 I read works by Pynchon, Woolf, McCarthy, Garcia-Marquez, and Joyce, among others) the thing that has struck me most is the degree to which *form* is the aspect being experimented with. Of course all of the authors I listed above have significant bits of content to convey, be it commentary on Irish culture or critiques of gender roles or illustrations of the violence inherent in the foundation of the American nation, but what sets these authors apart in my mind is their emphasis on writing form and its novelty. Joyce is most notorious here for his stream-of-consciousness style among other things, but I can also cite McCarthy's disdain for punctuation or Pynchon's irrationally paranoid positioning of the narrator. In all of these cases the *way the writing is done* allows the author to convey the intended content in a particularly poignant way, and seals their importance as pioneers of literature. 

Writing science is not art, or at least does not claim to be. So it may be said that for this reason innovations in its form are not to be celebrated or encouraged. I must insist that in none of what I am about to write am I going to emphasize form **over** content in scientific work, as this would be literally sophistry and I would not be caught dead supporting such a position. That said, that doesn't mean no effort on form should ever be performed, and I contend that our scientific writing would benefit from a reshaping from a literary, perhaps superficial perspective. I believe this can be considered in a few different arenas: the writing itself, the presentation of data in figures and tables, and the structure of the work at large scale in papers, monographs, posters, and presentations. I will focus here mostly on the writing style itself, although the other two areas merit focused attention as well.

This is not to say that no scientist at all thinks about form. In particular, a subset of scientists focus their attention on so-called "science communication", a field of work which encompasses popular science writing as well as some aspects of scientific pedagogy. Academic as well as non-academic work in this area is obviously closely related to the matter at hand here, and much of my thinking is informed by my rubbing shoulders with practitioners of SciComm. But there is a key difference here, in that the pedagogical and pop-science communication is intended as a sort of "translation" of scientific work into a format which is consumable by non-scientists, be it students or the broader public. I am interested here in communication among scientists themselves, although the boundary between "student" and "practicing scientist" is a blurry one and so much of what I am thinking about in this post is closely related to pedagogy as well. In simple terms, writing more compelling work should draw in readers of all kinds, no matter the degree of exposure they have had before. If anything, early-career and student scientists are the most important audience here, as they have not yet been conditioned to accept the normal forms of scientific writing, and they are the most susceptible to losing interest since their lives and careers are not as much bound up in their need to keep up with scientific literature.

The text of a scientific paper is notoriously unpleasant to read as well as write, for experts and non-experts alike. This has become increasingly sealed in place over the past century, and is a common point of complaint from scientists themselves. As a graduate student it was one of the elements of my education which was never explicitly taught to me in a class (there is in fact no writing class requirement for most graduate science degrees, despite the massive amount of time scientists spend writing), but instead was nudged into me by my advisors when they edited my work. It is further enforced by the peer review process, which is itself a mostly informal exchange of notes from one scientist to another. It's funny how self-organized this process is: no journal editor has ever directly commented on my writing, and in my time spent as a peer reviewer the style in which a paper is written is rarely something I have been told to pay attention to by an editor or a journal. Therefore it is surprising that such uniformity has been reached, that all the papers published in Nature as well as in smaller journals achieve a ubiquitous style which is as dense and dry as a stale cracker. Somehow the scientific community has self-regulated in such a way.

This is entirely conjecture, but I believe that this at least partially stems from the self-identification of most scientists as not belonging to an artistic or creative tradition. Here I use "creative" in a narrow sense: many argue that the scientific process is one of creative thought but I don't think the culture of the arts and the crafts has successfully steeped into science despite this. What is this artistic culture? It is one which, among other things, rewards experimentation and novelty in form itself. Scientists feel somewhat "insecure" in their creative or expressive abilities, and so they must shield themselves behind an agreed-upon soulless writing style (an almost *non-* writing). The uniformity and blandness then helps the individual scientist, in that their task as a researcher is not anymore to make the process of reading about the research in any way accessible or pleasant, rather, it is merely to fit the results they have into a pre-existing template. And if the resulting document is snooze-inducing, that's just the way it is.

I think this can be remedied in a few key ways: first, experimentation (or mere effort) in writing form needs to be encouraged and rewarded in scientific work. Second, those journals which employ editors with a writing background (such as Nature and Science) may give those editors more say in the moulding of written articles, and in giving writing feedback to the authors and their peer-reviewers. If the leading journals boast articles that are well-written and interesting to read, there may even be interest in checking those journals outside of their "high impact factor" attraction. This could then have a downstream effect of incentivizing scientists to write more creatively about their work. Schools should make writing classes or workshops a required portion of their graduate curricula. It is absurd that science PhD students are expected to output massive amounts of writing (my PhD thesis was a few hundred pages long, for example) without almost any formal training. And most importantly those scientists which choose to experiment with their writing should not be immediately stifled. There is a soft agreement among scientists that "old papers used to be written better" (for example the reader can check any of Einstein's [Annus Mirabilis papers](https://guides.loc.gov/einstein-annus-mirabilis/1905-papers)) but it was never made clear to me why we stopped writing that way. Looking at those Einstein papers, one thing that stands out is the sheer volume of text between each equation explaining what the thinking going into the next step is. Albert makes significant use of analogies and thought experiments in his work, making it clearer to the reader what he is thinking as he is doing his mathematical manipulations. Granted not all of us can think or explain as clearly as the most prominent scientist of all time, but I doubt these papers would be published as-is in Nature today ('too much fluff!'). Or maybe Albert would have been disincentivized from writing this way long before he got to these results.

A final point I want to make is that perhaps the needed shift is away from the journal format entirely. It is almost universally agreed upon (even among otherwise conservative scientists) that the private chokehold on scientific publishing is counterproductive, and some recent meta-thought on science has cast doubt on the peer-review process as it is. More and more work (especially in theoretical physics, mathematics, and other less-empirical sciences) is simply uploaded to preprint servers such as arXiv, which allow text formats of all kinds with very little restriction on page number and writing style. While some form of feedback and peer-review is critical for the scientific method to take place, it is far from necessary that Elsevier needs to be in the middle cashing out at every step and mediating the exchange. This is for another post where I should do a materialist analysis of scientific knowledge production (insert nerd emoji here) but the actual labor-time that goes into peer review is entirely unremunerated anyway, so it does not need to go through a journal. And peer-reviewers rarely comment on style, so we need not be concerned with that.

It is even possible that writing *articles* is an unnecessary form of publishing science. We could shift to more blog-like formats, or use interactive pages such as a Jupyter notebook or other such things. This would make reproducibility of results easier (I am far from the first person to have this thought). All of these possibilities would count as experiments in form, and I would welcome them as breaks in the wall of dry crackers that is the current body of scientific writing.
