+++
title = "Story of a loafer"
date = "2023-11-14"
author = "Iraj"
description = "Maybe a baking recipe, or just a description of a typical Saturday"
useRelativeCover = true
katex = true
+++

# Preamble

This is a little story or recipe that I have been working on for a while. I am no professional baker and I do not formally recommend following this as a bread recipe. I just wanted to convey my love for bread baking. I must also credit Jill Storey for her beautiful [egg recipe](https://baltimorereview.org/spring_2014/contributor/jill-storey) which partially inspired this writing. If you actually want to get into baking and have questions I would love to answer them. My favorite recipe to follow these days is a modified version of Sarah Owens' [table loaf](https://food52.com/recipes/80565-table-loaf) recipe (warning, that one's a sourdough and will take much more of your time than what is depicted below).

--- 

# Amble

You awake after a long sleep. The boogers in your eyes make it hard to see, you rub them and blink a few times to peel your stiff eyelids open. You yawn and stretch and eventually take a step out of bed and stand up. You feel the sun on your back as you twist to the left, hugging yourself with your arms, twist in the opposite direction, spin your arms around and bend your knees a couple of times to get your joints moving. You hear a few pops as your old aches and injuries whisper to you so you know of their presence. You recall the tasks ahead of you. You’re supposed to host today. You put pants on and ruffle your hair.

You step into the bathroom and begin your daily duties. As you do this you mentally compile a list of necessary tasks. You recount who the guests are as you wash your face, grimacing when you remember that so-and-so’s annoying sister is in town and that Sally’s friend is coming who doesn’t eat dairy so they will need a cheese alternative. Sucks to be them, I’m not quite sure why anyone would deprive themselves of cheese. Put toothpaste on brush and stick it in your mouth, decide on drinks while going back and forth back and forth with the froth building up in your mouth as you envision the feast that’s going to take place. There’s going to be so many people and so much food and even music and dancing. You still have to pick the playlist and you haven’t even checked if Dina’s sister is in town and the froth is dripping down the side of your mouth and you don’t notice. What’s for dessert again? And the tablecloth, did I remember to wash the blue one? Oh god there’s now toothpaste on my chest that’s very nice. You clean up your mess and stare into your own eyes and let out a deep sigh and go out into the kitchen.

You must bake bread before starting anything else today.

Bringing people together requires food. Baking a loaf is quite the same: little yeast cells might not have names like Dina and Sally but they like a lot of the same things (carbs). Give them the right tasty treats and coddle them into place and let them fart happily into the mixture. Take that foam and stretch it around to give it shape and bake it to expand the air and freeze it in place and you have what we call a good old fashioned loaf of leavened dough.

You put on a pot of coffee because while your face has been washed and your joints oiled, your mind is still clotted with fog and muck from the previous night and getting a proper night’s sleep is not an option so instead we opt for caffeine. You watch it brew and whistle a certain tune, maybe it’s an ode to the molecule keeping you going every day, your dearest most beloved 1,3,7-Trimethylxanthine.

You pour. You sip. You feel your guts wake. Take a trip to your porcelain throne. Wash hands (!!!). Some more sips. Now you’re ready to go. Put some music on.

You open your flour box and scan the contents. Debate white, rye, dark flours. Get your priorities in order: you want flavor, stretch, and you want feed for the yeast. twenty-eighty whole wheat and white it is. You figure some of your guests are basic so rye isn’t an option. So one fifth whole wheat to give your culture some culture. Measure out the flour just enough for two loaves. Add in the yeast and mix it with your fingers. The flour is soft and fine, it forms a gentle pillow in your hands. You take a minute to play with it and marvel at this texture, you draw a little smiley face with your pinky. Flour is the first and simplest stage of the bread. Individual starch and protein bits who don’t know about each other. They’re dry, dessicated and alone. Among them are sleeping yeast cells laying in wait for the task ahead of them. They’re humanity’s closest companions and their ancestors have beem loyally helping us make bread for thousands of years. As you run your fingers through the primordial seemingly lifeless sands in your bowl you prepare to perform an act of necromancy. You walk to the other side of your kitchen where you keep an endless supply of that magic fluid which will bring the community to life.

You fetch water.

About four-fifths the weight of the flour. You pour it in and watch it form a little pool in the middle of the floury desert. You dip your hands in and begin to mix. This is an exercise in community-building, but some small disagreements have to be resolved first. The flour and the water initially do not like each other. The flour forms little cliques and you drag your fingers through them. This forces all the components together and breaks the weak bonds holding them in their isolated bands. You know the solution will be more stable when everyone is in contact, and you know the water will help you get there. The isolated yeast and starch and protein are now beginning to interact thanks to their environment. You can feel the dough form and get viscous as the starches feel each other. The clumps have disappeared and now the dough is one uniform piece and you keep running your hands through it despite how sticky and messy it is getting. The starches absorb as much of the water as they can while you pull them apart from each other and you keep mixing and it is starting to come together. You stop. The community must be given time to take shape. You cover it and let it rest for a little while, something like ten minutes as the yeast cells start to divide and eat a bit and the dough absorbs more water. You want the cells to be strong and numerous when you add the next ingredient which may be a little bit hostile to them.

As you wait you wash your hands again because they got covered in dough. How do the professional bakers do it their hands always stay clean and they seem to lose no dough at all. You dry your hands and drink more coffee and pace around a bit and maybe munch on a banana. You’re not fully conscious and it feels great letting this process you know so well happen to you. Time passes and you eventually return to the counter.

You measure and pour in the salt. About a fiftieth of the total flour weight. Salt isn’t just there for flavor, it actually plays an important chemical role. It makes things tasty but it also helps the dough hold on to more water. And the more water in the dough the more open and bubbly the final result will be. The salt and the yeast don’t love each other but as any two members of a thriving community know, they must work together. At this stage in the production all of the actors are present but not everyone is playing their role yet. The yeast is already starting to do what it must: eat and reproduce and fart. The whole purpose of keeping a culture alive inside your bread is for it to foam up, fill up with little bublles of gas which will expand when you bake it. So you must take care of the little yeast community as they produce the fumes you so desire. They must be as happy as possible: you must also make sure the dough remains a warm temperature with plenty of humidity around and you must make sure their society doesn’t run out of food. With all the flour in the dough that’s unlikely to happen anytime soon. You embrace your role of shepherd and move forward.

You begin kneading. You stretch and you fold and you squeeze and you make sure that every part of the dough passes through every other part and you do this over and over again. You think of those internet videos where they show colors being mixed into silicon with machines folding it over and over and you wonder if the same thing is happening here and the answer is kind of yes but also no. At this stage you are building structure. The dough contains a tremendous amount of protein (gluten) and you are forcing it into shape. Each protein forms one strand, but for a bite to have texture you need to bring strands together and give them proper order. It’s nice to have some protein strands in your ball but if they don’t cooperate then your dough will remain all loosey goosey and never form a tight chewy crumb. Like a spider you build a web inside this dough. You want as many strands to criss-cross throughout this piece of dough as possible. You want them long and tangled so that they can pull together and give the bread some bounce. As you weave your web you begin to feel the dough change as the network holds water better and sticks more to itself and less to the walls of its container. The dough ball becomes smooth, you feel yourself working harder to fold it. You might worry that the yeast cells are being disturbed by this but they are so small they could not care less. They are now reproducing in earnest and the folds you are introducing are trapping them and their gases into little bubbles. You fold the dough one more time then slap it back into the bowl and put a wet towel over it.

Your spider’s web is now home to millions of cells who are reproducing and airing out their thoughts at an alarming rate. The dough will double in size easily in an hour or so. Pour out some more coffee and do some cleaning. You can take a breather. As you sip sit and ponder your loaf is taking shape. Water is incorporated further, the protein strands relax, the gases blow it up further, the strands stretch. All sorts of stuff is happening as the ball grows and inches its way up the sides of the bowl while you plan the other dishes for the day. You look at it every dozen minutes. Everything is going as planned and you’re impatient.

Once it seems to be done puffing up and doesn’t bounce back when you poke it you turn on the oven to a blazing temperature. You want it so hot that you’ll get a toasty crispy crust on your loaf so when you bite into it you can both hear and feel the difference between the inside and the outside. You want the burnt flavor and the brown singing on the ends of your loaf so you crank up the heat and smell gas for a second and then hear the flames go on with a whoosh. You put the dutch ovens inside. Everything must be hot. The oven begins to do its work and you see the orange glow below the racks. You feel the heat rising. Is that you or is it the room? 

Now you make the loaves. You take the dough out of the bowl. It is a thick foam, sticking to itself, malleable yet elastic. It has a texture unlike anything else. It flows yet bounces and it sticks and also slides. It’s a living mass you can hold in your hand. You cut it in half, and grab one of the future loaves and place it on some flour. You stretch it open and then you fold it over into itself and form a little balloon. You fold it again and tuck the ends and you feel the tension in the dough ball. You roll it over and drag it over the countertop and allow the gluten to stretch, over and over, so the balloon surface is totally smooth. You let it sit. Repeat with its companion. Slap, stretch open, fold over and over then drag drag drag the soft balloon. The bread knows what is to happen and it plays along because you make it. It can sense fear they say. Beginner bakers know the horror: if you hesitate and let your fingers linger the dough takes advantage and sucks them in. It sticks and doesn’t let you manipulate it. The dough must be mastered and controlled, once you do this it will respond accordingly. The loaves are shaped. They are smooth, they are tense, they are sitting. You put a damp rag over them. You wait. 

The oven is hot now, the loaves have relaxed a bit. You take the pots out of the chamber. They burn you a little but you do not notice. You must move fast and you are in a trance, either because of the hot air or your nerves you feel yourself sweating as you move. You place a dutch oven next to one dough ball and you shape it again. Open it, stretch it, fold it over and over and drag drag drag now pick it up and drop it in. Throw some flour on top. 

Take the sacrificial knife. You like to use a razorblade. Breathe in.

You press the blade into your creation, you drag it across scoring a deep gash into the ball. You mustn’t hesitate or slow down. The cut is crucial and it is your mark on your work. You cut deeply, feeling the live dough spring and recoil as the tension on its surface is released. It looks to be in pain and you keep cutting. You comfort yourself by remembering it is all worth it.

Today you brought a community to life and it sits before you. In the heat the foam’s gases will expand so the ball must be allowed to grow. The lidded pot you keep it in will retain moisture, which helps, but the outer layer of the bread will still prevent it from inflating. So you cut it open. After this first act of betrayal, you throw on a lid and put the colony in your own personal inferno. You close the door. 20 minutes. Once the balls are inflated, you take the lids off the pots. Time for the crust to form. Another 25 minutes. You wait anxiously, and you ponder the consequences of your actions. As the toasting smell of bread crust rises, your concerns slowly fade. You sip some more coffee.
