+++
title = "Balls rolling down hills: functional explanations in science and history"
date = "2023-07-16"
author = "Iraj"
cover = ""
description = "I muse a bit on G.A. Cohen's use of functional explanation in his work, and connect to my experience in the sciences."
useRelativeCover = true
katex = true
+++

# Cohen on Historical Materialism

Before I dive into the topic at hand I should contextualize where these thoughts come from. In the past couple of months I slowly made my way through G.A. Cohen's "Karl Marx's Theory of History: A Defence", after deciding I needed to understand historical materialism better. For those readers who aren't aware of his work, Cohen was one of the founders of "analytical Marxism", a branch of Marxist thought which aims to re-formulate Marx's ideas following the analytical tradition in philosophy. 

I found this approach really enlightening. As one would expect, Cohen develops Marx's framework in a systematic, almost mathematical way. The book reads a bit like a math textbook: proposition, lemma, proof, etc. It's compelling, and I think it deepened my understanding significantly by appealing to my general appreciation for formal descriptions of things.

But this isn't a post about historical materialism. This is a post about "functional explanation". What is that? And what does it have to do with Cohen's book?

# Functional Explanation

In his book, Cohen defends the use of what he calls "functional explanations", in his formulation of Marxian theory of history. One important example of these is the following: one of the founding tenets of HM is that economic structure at a given point in time is determined by the nature of the productive forces at that point in time. One could write this in functional terms as: "the function of the economic structure is to maximize the productivity of a given set of productive forces". This leads to capitalist class structure obtaining during a period of history where industrial scale production is possible, for example. Or "the function of the state is to enforce the class hierarchy at a given point in history". 

These statements have a strange quirk in them, in that it seems causality has been flipped around. It seems that we're saying that the economic structure "knows" in advance how it should be so as to maximize productivity, and organizes itself such as to actualize that potential. 

Another feature of such statements, and this is a common attack Marxists receive when they criticize economic or social structures, is that it smacks of conspiracy theory. When someone says that the state has been set-up such as to efficiently do the bidding of the ruling classes, that sounds like one is implying forethought, dark smoky rooms, etc. Cohen spends a whole chapter (and a very technical one at that) defending the logical soundness of these statements, specifically arguing that in certain circumstances they do not violate the laws of causality or imply conspiratorial decision making. 

# My Understanding, Or Lack Thereof

This is the part where I admit that much of the formal defense of these statements provided by Cohen went right over my head. The thing is though, we use statements like these so often that I feel like I must still grapple with the problem at hand.

In general these kinds of statements, as their name suggests, come about when we claim that things serve a certain purpose in the world (I guess some would call this teleology). In a skeptical, areligious view of the universe that's a really slippery kind of stance to take, so how do we defend this position? It seems to me that functional structures start to make sense once you've assumed a certain theoretical framework, which is supposed to effectively describe the evolution of reality. This is the case for historical materialism, classical mechanics, Darwin's theory of evolution, etc. Once we are operating under one such set of assumptions, this makes functional explanations viable. Why? Because a theoretical framework is inevitably grounded in a set of axioms I'm not interested in proving, and these axioms automatically lay down functional relationships between things in the world.

Probably the most powerful example is natural selection, as it permeates contexts other than ecology as well. It creates situations which on their face seem to absolutely violate causality, and imply teleological structures in the world. Cohen cites the classic example of the giraffe's neck. One can make the functional statement "the giraffe has a long neck in order to access higher parts of the tree". In a void, such a statement is nonsensical if one does not assume the existence of a Creator with purpose. However, *assuming the correctness of Darwin's theory*, we can treat "the purpose of the giraffe's long neck is to ..." as equivalent to the statement "those giraffes which did not have long necks fared worse in natural competition, leading to the current state of things". 

What is the advantage of the functional formulation? To me it does two things: first, it makes it easier to convey certain concepts (more on this later). But more importantly, it makes explicit the logical consequences of assuming the truth of a certain theory. 

# Functional Explanations in Science, and Anthropomorphization

I found this formulation particularly interesting because it is implicitly used all the time in science, in a modified manner. I cited above the example of evolution, where functional explanations are a convenient shortcut for describing traits that evolve due to selection (although there is something to be said that this is inaccurate, since much of evolution is driven by simple genetic drift and mutations that aren't particularly beneficial by any means).

In physics, this kind of intellectual shortcut often takes the form of anthropomorphization. This is slightly different from the "functional" statements Cohen defends in his book, but I think they accomplish similar things. We often say of a physical system in which there is a potential energy, that it "wants to find the minimum of the potential". For example, electrons in an electrical circuit "want to go" to the positive terminal of the battery. 

Now we can treat this as a convenient intellectual shortcut (there are circumstances where this really helps conceptualize the behavior of a system, and physicists use it *all the time* both in explanations and in their own mental models), but I have a contention (partially due to my friend and fellow physicist Lauren Altman who loves this idea) that there is a sense in which it is literally true, provided we make some assumptions about the nature of consciousness. IF we assume that reality is mechanistic and human brains are driven by physical laws, then there is no more truth to the statement "when I am sleepy, I want to go to bed" than there is in the statement "the apple wants to fall from the tree".

Let's take a totally different scientific example, one which I have recently encountered in the entirely new world of (insert spooky noises) *cancer research*. In the study of cancer people are often interested in studying the different genetic mutations that lead to the development of tumors. Now these mutations, as with any other mutation in our body, are completely random: some UV ray hits the DNA inside your skin cells, and messes it up in just the right way to lead to a melanoma. Or one of the heavy metals you inhale while smoking binds to the DNA in your lung cells in just the right way to lead to some type of lung cancer. In either case they are random, *but only a tiny subset of possible mutations will actually lead to a tumor*. Tumors have certain really special behaviors: their automatic cell death machinery needs to be compromised, they need to somehow mess with immune signaling to get past our white blood cells, they also usually hijack the cell growth program and grow exponentially as a result, along with a laundry list of other traits. If only a subset of these is the case, then the cell in question will likely not become a tumor. This is why not every breath of cigarette smoke leads to lung cancer. However, in the context of cancer research, the causality is often flipped around and the researchers refer to different oncogenic (cancer-genic) mutations as being "strategies" that the tumor adopts. The tumors aren't conscious and strategizing, but the end result is the same as if they did. Here I won't make the bolder claim as above that this is *identical* to human strategizing, but I do think the "strategies" adopted by tumors are in very close analogy to the strategies adopted by market actors in a capitalist economy for example, and that just as it is not irrational to think of tumors as effectively strategizing, it is also not a "conspiracy theory" to think of capitalists as explicitly planning the process of exploitation of the working classes. 

# On Conspiracy

Which brings me right back round to Marxism and critiques thereof. Given these examples, it should be clearer now that when a Marxist makes the (apparently conspiratorial) statement: "the state exists to defend the needs of the upper class", or "capitalists divide workers into infighting groups to facilitate their exploitation", it can be construed as the same kind of functional explanation I've shown above. We're saying that given the assumptions of historical materialism (historical tendency to development leading to the primacy of the forces of production in the determination of economic structures) then as a collective the actors within the social structure will usually behave in predictable ways, driven by the incentives acting on them due to their historical context (for example, the impossible-to-avoid drive to reduce effective wages that even the "nicest" capitalists are subject to, simply because of market competition).

So next time you are in a discussion and someone makes an apparently conspiratiorial statement about what "The Man" wants, it's worth thinking twice and considering whether they mean it literally, or whether they are implying a more subtle statement regarding the tendencies and incentives acting on the people in power during our time. I think we all use functional explanations in building world-pictures, but we are often not generous in listening to other people's functional explanations, and take them at face value. Let's not do that!
